# The price impact of order book events 

# Rama Cont, Arseniy Kukanov and Sasha Stoikov 

March 2011 

## **Abstract** 

We study the price impact of order book events - limit orders, market orders and cancelations - using the NYSE TAQ data for 50 U.S. stocks. We show that, over short time intervals, price changes are mainly driven by the _order flow imbalance_ , defined as the imbalance between supply and demand at the best bid and ask prices. Our study reveals a linear relation between order flow imbalance and price changes, with a slope inversely proportional to the market depth. These results are shown to be robust to seasonality effects, and stable across time scales and across stocks. We argue that this linear price impact model, together with a scaling argument, implies the empirically observed “square-root” relation between price changes and trading volume. However, the relation between price changes and trade volume is found to be noisy and less robust than the one based on order flow imbalance. 

## **Contents** 

|**1**|**Introduction**|**2**|
|---|---|---|
||1.1<br>Summary<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|2|
||1.2<br>Outline<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|3|
|**2**|**A model for the price impact of orders**|**3**|
||2.1<br>Variables<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|3|
||2.2<br>A stylized model of the order book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|5|
||2.3<br>Model specifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|6|
|**3**|**Estimation and results**|**8**|
||3.1<br>The trades and quotes (TAQ) data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|8|
||3.2<br>Empirical fndings<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|8|
||3.3<br>Intraday patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|14|
|**4**|**Price impact of trades**|**16**|
||4.1<br>Trade imbalance vs order fow imbalance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|16|
||4.2<br>Does volume move the prices? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|18|
|**5**|**Conclusion**|**21**|
|**A **|**Appendix: TAQ data processing**|**26**|



## **1 Introduction** 

The availability of high-frequency records of trades and quotes has stimulated an extensive empirical and theoretical literature on the relation between order flow, liquidity and price movements in order-driven markets. A particularly important issue for applications is the impact of orders on prices: the optimal liquidation of a large block of shares, given a fixed time horizon, crucially involves assumptions on price impact (see Bertsimas and Lo [6], Almgren and Chriss [2], Obizhaeva and Wang [35]). 

Various models for price impact have been proposed in the literature but there is little agreement on how to model it [7]. In the empirical literature, price impact has been described by various authors as linear, non-linear, square root, virtual, mechanical, temporary, instantaneous, permanent or transient. The only consensus seems to be the intuitive notion that imbalance between supply and demand moves prices. 

The empirical literature on price impact has primarily focused on trades. One approach is to study the impact of “parent orders” gradually executed over time using proprietary data (see Engle et. al [14], Almgren et. al [3]). Alternatively, empirical studies on public data [16, 18, 20, 28, 29, 43, 38, 39] have investigated the relation between the direction and sizes of trades and price changes and typically conclude that the price impact of trades is an increasing, concave (“square root”) function of their size. This focus on trades leaves out the information in quotes, which provide a more detailed picture of price formation [15], and raises a natural question: is volume of trades truly the best explanatory variable for price movements in markets where many quote events can happen between two trades? 

Understanding the price impact of orders is also important from a theoretical perspective, in the context of optimal order execution. Huberman and Stanzl [25] show that there are arbitrage opportunities if the effect of trades on prices is permanent and the impact is non-linear; Gatheral [19] extends this analysis by showing that if the price impact function is non-linear, impact needs to decay in a particular way to exclude arbitrage. Bouchaud et al. [9] associated the decay of price impact of trades with limit orders, arguing that there is a “delicate interplay between two opposite tendencies: strongly correlated market orders that lead to super-diffusion (or persistence), and mean reverting limit orders that lead to sub-diffusion (or anti-persistence)”. This insight implies that looking solely at trades, without including the effect of limit orders amounts to ignoring an important part of the price formation mechanism. 

There is ample evidence that limit orders play an important role in determining price dynamics. Arriving limit orders significantly reduce the impact of trades [44] and the concave shape of the price impact function changes depending on the contemporaneous limit order arrivals [41]. The outstanding limit orders (also known as market depth) significantly affect the impact of an individual trade ([30]) and low depth is associated with large price changes [45, 17]. Hasbrouck and Seppi [22] use depth as one of the factors that determine price impact. The emphasis in these studies remains, however, on trades and there are few empirical studies that focus on limit orders from the outset. Notable exceptions are Engle & Lunde [15], Hautsch and Huang [23] who perform an impulse-response analysis of limit and market orders, Hopman [24] who analyzes the impact of different order categories over 30 minute intervals and Bouchaud et al. [12] who examine the impact of market orders, limit orders and cancelations at the level of individual events. 

## **1.1 Summary** 

We conduct in this study an empirical investigation of the impact of order book events –market orders, limit orders and cancelations– on equity prices. Although previous studies give a relatively complex description of this impact, we argue that, in fact, their impact on price dynamics 

2 

may be modeled parsimoniously through a _single_ variable, the _order flow imbalance_ (OFI), which represents the net order flow at the bid and ask and tracks changes in the size of the bid and ask queues by 

- increasing every time the bid size increases, the ask size decreases or the bid/ask prices increase 

- decreases every time the bid size decreases, the ask size increases or the bid/ask prices decrease. 

Interestingly, this variable treats a market sell and a cancel buy of the same size as equivalent, since they have the same effect on the size of the bid queue. We find that this aggregate variable explains mid-price changes over short time scales in a linear fashion, for a large sample of stocks, with an average _R_[2] of 65%. The resulting price impact model relates prices, trades, limit orders and cancelations in a simple way: it is _linear_ , requires the estimation of a single parameter and it is robust across stocks and across timescales. 

The slope of this relation, which we call the _price impact coefficient_ , exhibits intraday seasonality in line with known intraday patterns observed in spreads, market depth and price volatility [1, 4, 31, 34] which have been explained in terms of intraday shifts in information asymmetry [33] or informativeness of trades [21]. Motivated by a stylized model of the order book, we relate the intraday changes in the price impact coefficient to variations in market depth and show that price impact is inversely proportional to the depth of the order book. This allows us to explain intraday patterns in price impact and price volatility using only observable quantities - the order flow imbalance and the market depth, as opposed to unobservable parameters previously invoked in the literature, such as information asymmetry or informativeness of trades. 

The intuition that “it takes volume to move prices”, though widely confirmed by empirical studies [27], is not easy to explain theoretically (see [37, Chapter 6.2]). In Section 4, we show that our price impact model, together with a scaling argument, leads to an apparent “square root” relation between price changes and trade volume, similar to some findings in the empirical literature [11, 40]. However, we argue that this relation is not robust and is a statistical artifact due to the aggregation of data. 

## **1.2 Outline** 

The article is structured as follows. In Section 2, motivated by a stylized model of the order book, we specify a parsimonious model that links stock price changes, order flow imbalance and market depth. Section 3 describes the trades and quotes data and estimation results for our model. There, we also show how intraday patterns in depth and order flow imbalance generate intraday patterns in price impact and price volatility. In Section 4 we discuss the role of trading volume as an explanatory variable and show that order flow imbalance is more effective in explaining price moves than variables based on trades. We also derive a scaling relation between order flow imbalance and traded volume and show how the “square-root” price impact of volume follows from our model. We present our conclusions in Section 5. 

## **2 A model for the price impact of orders** 

## **2.1 Variables** 

We focus on ‘Level I order book’: the limit orders sitting at the best bid and ask. Every observation of the bid and the ask consists of the bid price _P[B]_ , the size _q[B]_ of the bid queue (in number of shares), the ask price _P[A]_ and the size _q[A]_ of the ask queue (in number of shares): 

3 

**==> picture [129 x 102] intentionally omitted <==**

The bid price and size represent the demand for a stock, while the ask price and size represent the supply. We enumerate these observations by _n_ and compare ( _Pn[B] −_ 1 _[, q] n[B] −_ 1 _[, P] n[ A] −_ 1 _[, q] n[A] −_ 1[)] with ( _Pn[B][, q] n[B][, P] n[ A][, q] n[A]_[).][Between][two][such][observations,][only][one][of][the][following][events][can] occur: 

**==> picture [291 x 81] intentionally omitted <==**

We define the variable _en_ which measures the contribution of the _n−_ th event to the size of bid and ask queues: 

**==> picture [345 x 17] intentionally omitted <==**

Note that if _q[B]_ increases but _P[B]_ remains the same, we assign _en_ = _qn[B][−][q] n[B] −_ 1[,][representing][the] size that was added at the bid. If _q[B]_ decreases, we also assign _en_ = _qn[B][−][q] n[B] −_ 1[,][representing][the] size that was removed from the bid, whether due to a market sell or cancel buy order. If _P[B]_ increases, we let _en_ = _qn[B]_[, representing the size of a price-improving limit order.][If] _[ P][ B]_[decreases,] we let _en_ = _qn[B] −_ 1[,][representing][the][size][that][was][removed,][whether][due][to][a][market][order][or][a] cancellation. The same classification is done for events on the ask side, with signs reversed. 

Events affecting the order book occur at random times _τn_ , and we define _N_ ( _t_ ) = max _{n|τn ≤ t}_ to be the number of events during [0 _, t_ ]. We define the _order flow imbalance_ over time intervals [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ] as a sum of individual event contributions _en_ over these intervals: 

**==> picture [112 x 37] intentionally omitted <==**

where _N_ ( _tk−_ 1) + 1 and _N_ ( _tk_ ) are the index of the first and the index of the last event in the interval [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ]. The order flow imbalance is a measure of supply/demand imbalance, which encompasses trades, limit orders and cancelations. Whereas previous studies [10, 20, 22, 29, 38, 43] focused on measures of “trade imbalance”[1] , using orders provides a more natural way of measuring supply and demand. 

We also consider mid-price changes (in number of ticks) over the same time grid: 

**==> picture [107 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

where _Pk_ is the mid-quote price at time _tk_ and _δ_ is the tick size (equal to 1 cent in our data). 

> 1Hopman [24] computes the supply/demand imbalance based on limit orders and trades, but not cancelations. 

4 

## **2.2 A stylized model of the order book** 

Consider first a stylized model of the order book in which 

1. the number of shares at each price level beyond the best bid/ask is equal to _D_ . 

2. limit orders arrivals and cancelations occur only at the best bid/ask. 

We will show that under these assumptions a linear relation holds between order flow imbalance and price changes. Consider three scenarios, when only market buy orders, limit buy orders or limit sell cancels happen over some time interval [ _t, t_ + ∆ _t_ ]: 

- Market sell orders remove _M[s]_ shares from the bid. 

**==> picture [250 x 106] intentionally omitted <==**

- Market sell orders remove _M[s]_ shares from the bid, while limit buy orders add _L[b]_ shares to the bid. 

**==> picture [250 x 106] intentionally omitted <==**

- Market sell orders and limit buy cancels remove _M[s]_ + _C[b]_ shares from the bid, while limit buy orders add _L[b]_ shares to the bid. 

**==> picture [250 x 106] intentionally omitted <==**

5 

The three variables _M[b]_ , _C[s]_ and _L[s]_ for the ask can be defined analogously. Under the above assumptions, the impact of order book events at the bid (ask) side of the book is _additive_ and only depends on their net effect on the bid (ask) queue size: 

**==> picture [137 x 13] intentionally omitted <==**

Similarly, for the ask: 

**==> picture [147 x 14] intentionally omitted <==**

These relations are remarkably simple - they involve no parameters and incorporate the effects of all order book events on bid and ask prices. Although the following analysis can be carried for the bid and the ask prices separately, we take their average (the mid-price) to simplify the analysis: 

**==> picture [263 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

Note that the above is equivalent (up to truncation) to 

**==> picture [267 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

where _OFI_ = _L[b] − C[b] − M[s] − L[s]_ + _C[s]_ + _M[b]_ and _ϵ_ is the truncation error. This expression for _OFI_ is obtained from its definition by grouping individual order contrubutions _ei_ by their types (limit buys, market sells, etc). 

## **2.3 Model specification** 

In reality, order books have complex dynamics and the relation (1) will only hold in a statistical sense. For example, limit orders and cancelations occur at all levels of the order book. The distribution of depth across price levels often has humps, gaps and is itself a separate object of study [39, 46]. Moreover, the depth is subject to important intraday fluctuations. Finally, there may be hidden orders in the book which are not reported in the data [5]. With these considerations, we suggest the following relation: 

**==> picture [281 x 12] intentionally omitted <==**

where _β_ is the _price impact coefficient_ and _ϵk_ is a noise term due to the influence of deeper levels of the order book and rounding errors. Our earlier discussion suggests that the price impact coefficient is inversely related to market depth, which is itself subject to intraday fluctuations. We define a measure of depth by averaging the bid/ask queue sizes over intervals [ _Ti−_ 1 _, Ti_ ]: 

**==> picture [256 x 37] intentionally omitted <==**

We therefore specify the following relation between the price impact coefficient _βi_ in the time interval [ _Ti−_ 1 _, Ti_ ] and our measure of market depth as: 

**==> picture [265 x 25] intentionally omitted <==**

where _c, λ_ are constants and _νi_ is a noise term. Note that the stylized model exposed above corresponds to _λ_ = 1. 

6 

The specification (2-3) may be regarded as a model of the instantaneous price impact over a short time interval [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ]. An order, submitted at _τ ∈_ [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ], has a contribution _eτ_ and joins the aggregate order flow imbalance _OFIk_ . If the order goes in the same direction as the majority of the orders ( _sgn_ ( _eτ_ ) = _sgn_ ( _OFIk_ )), it reinforces the concurrent order flow imbalance and can affect the price. If the order goes against the concurrent order flow imbalance ( _sgn_ ( _eτ_ ) = _−sgn_ ( _OFIk_ )), it is compensated by other orders and may have an instantaneous impact of zero. In our model all events (including trades) have a linear price impact, equal to _β_ on average. Their realized impact, however, depends on the rest of the orders that arrive during the same time interval. 

The idea that the concurrent limit order activity can make a difference in terms of trades’ impact was demonstrated by Stephens et al. [41], where authors show that the shape of the price impact function essentially depends on the contemporaneous limit order activity. Our approach can also be related to the model proposed by Bouchaud et al. [12]. where order book events have a linear impact on prices, which depends on their signs and types[2] . The major difference of our models lies in the aggregation across time and events. As argued in [12], order book events have complicated auto- and cross-correlation structures on the timescale of individual events, which typically vanish after 10 seconds. In our data the autocorrelations at a timescale of 10 seconds are small and quickly vanish as well (ACF plots for a representative stock are shown on Figure 1). Finally, Hasbrouck and Seppi [22] propose a model similar to (2, 3) for explaining the price impact of trades. Although their focus is on trades, they also allow the price impact coefficient to depend on contemporaneous liquidity factors and change through time. 

However, the linear equation (2) is quite different from models of price impact that consider only the size of trades [18, 20, 29, 43, 38, 39]. Instead of modeling price impact of trades as a (nonlinear) function of trade size, we show that the price impact of all events (including trades) is a linear function of their size after events are aggregated into a single imbalance variable. In Section 4 we will argue that, first, the effect of trades on prices is adequately captured by the order flow imbalance and, second, that if one leaves out all events except trades, the relation 2 leads to an apparent concave relation between price changes and trade volume. 

The next section provides an overview of the estimation results for our model. 

**==> picture [228 x 166] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 1: ACF of the mid-price changes ∆ _Pk_ , the order flow imbalance _OFIk_ and the 5% significance bounds for the Schlumberger stock (SLB). 

> 2 Note that in our case all order book events have the same average impact, equal to _βi_ , regardless of their type. As shown in [12], average impacts of different event types are empirically very similar, allowing to reasonably approximate them with a single number. 

7 

## **3 Estimation and results** 

## **3.1 The trades and quotes (TAQ) data** 

Our data set consists of one calendar month (April, 2010) of trades and quotes (TAQ) data for 50 stocks. The stocks were selected by a random number generator from the S&P 500 constituents. The S&P 500 composition for that month was obtained from Compustat and the data for individual stocks was obtained from the TAQ consolidated quotes and TAQ consolidated trades databases. The data were obtained through Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). 

Consolidated quotes contains all changes in queue sizes at the best bid and ask. For each stock, a data update consists of a timestamp (rounded to the nearest second), bid price, bid size, ask price, ask size and exchange flag. Consolidated trades (or market orders) consist of a timestamp, a price and a size. These two data sets are often referred to as Level 1 data, as opposed to Level 2 data, which also includes quote updates deeper in the book. 

Our reason for using TAQ data rather than Level 2 order book data, is that it is far more accessible, yet contains all events in the top order book (best bid and ask updates). We demonstrate that Level 1 TAQ data can be successfully used to study limit orders and we hope that more empirical studies of that subject will follow. We note that the ratio of the number of quote updates to the number trades is roughly 40 to 1 in our data. Many empirical studies have focused exclusively on trades rather than quotes, but the sheer ratio in the size of these data sets is a good indicator that more information may be conveyed by the quotes than by trades. 

Using a procedure described in detail in the appendix, we aggregate all quote updates to estimate the National Best Bid and Offer sizes and prices (NBBO) at each quote update. Instead of aggregating all exchanges in this fashion, one may also simply filter by the exchange flag and study one exchange at the time. Focussing on one exchange at a time yields similar results. 

We use a uniform grid in time _{t_ 0 _, . . . , tN }_ with a timescale _tk − tk−_ 1 _≡_ ∆ _t_ = 10 seconds to compute the price changes and the order flow imbalances. To test the robustness of our findings to the choice of the basic timescale, we repeated our calculations on a subsample of stocks for different values of ∆ _t_ , ranging from 10 quote updates (usually less than half of a second in our data) up to 10 minutes. The fit of our model generally increases with ∆ _t_ , but the rest of the results stays the same. Time aggregation serves two purposes: first, it alleviates the issue of data discreteness and second, it mitigates the errors due to the trade matching algorithm (described in the Appendix). 

## **3.2 Empirical findings** 

We assume that the price impact coefficient _β_ is constant over each half-hour interval [ _Ti, Ti_ +1] and estimate the model by ordinary least squares regression in each half-hour subsample for each stock: 

**==> picture [289 x 14] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of ∆ _Pk_ against _OFIk_ for one of the half-hour subsamples. Table 2 reports regression outputs, averaged across time for each stock. This table provides strong evidence of a linear relation between order flow imbalance and price changes. The goodness of fit is surprisingly high for all of the stocks, suggesting that the model (2) performs well regardless of stock-specific features[3] . In addition to the high quality of fits, the regression coefficient _βi_ is virtually always statistically significant (at a 95% level of the z-test), while the 

> 3 We note that _OFIk_ includes the contributions of price-changing order book events, leading to a possible tautology in the regression (4). This problem is inherent to all price impact modeling, because the explanatory variables (events or trades) can directly cause price changes. To test that the high _R_[2] in our regressions is not due to this tautology, we estimated (4) on a subsample of stocks, excluding the price-changing events from _OFIk_ . With this change the _R_[2] declined, but remained in the 35%-60% region. 

8 

intercept is mostly insignificant. Figure 3 represents the histogram of excess kurtosis values of the residuals ˆ _ϵk_ across subsamples: the relatively low level of kurtosis shows that the residuals are not predominantly associated with large price changes. Since the regression residuals demonstrate heteroscedasticity, we used White’s heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors for the z-test. To check for higher order/nonlinear dependence we add a quadratic term _γ_ ˆ _Q,iOFIk|OFIk|_ to the regression. The increase in _R_[2] , from 65% to 68% on average, is barely noticeable and the coefficient _γ_ ˆ _Q,i_ is statistically insignificant in most samples. 

**==> picture [284 x 207] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 2: Scatter plot of ∆ _Pk_ against _OFIk_ for the Schlumberger stock (SLB), 04/01/2010 11:30-12:00pm. 

**==> picture [284 x 202] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 3: Distribution of excess kurtosis of the residuals _ϵ_ ˆ _k_ across stocks and time. 

9 

Table 1. Descriptive statistics 

|Name|Ticker|Price|Daily<br>volume,<br>shares|Number of<br>best quote<br>updates|Number of<br>trades|Average<br>Spread,<br>cents|Maximum<br>spread,<br>cents|Best quote<br>depth,<br>shares|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Advanced Micro Devices<br>Apollo Group<br>American Express<br>Autozone<br>Bank of America<br>Becton Dickinson<br>Bank of New York Mellon<br>Boston Scientifc<br>Peabody Energy corp<br>Caterpillar<br>Chubb<br>Carnival<br>Cincinnati Financial<br>CME Group<br>Coach<br>ConocoPhillips<br>Coventry Health Care<br>Denbury Resources<br>Devon Energy<br>Equifax<br>Eaton<br>Fiserv<br>Hasbro<br>HCP<br>Starwood Hotels<br>Kohl’s<br>L-3 Communications<br>Lockheed Martin<br>Macy’s<br>Marriott<br>McAfee<br>McGraw-Hill<br>Medco Health Solutions<br>Merck<br>Marathon Oil<br>MeadWestvaco<br>Newmont Mining<br>Omnicom<br>MetroPCS Communications<br>Pultegroup<br>PerkinElmer<br>Ryder System<br>Reynolds American<br>Schlumberger<br>Teco Energy<br>Time Warner Cable<br>Whirlpool<br>Windstream<br>Watson Pharmaceuticals<br>XTO Energy|AMD<br>APOL<br>AXP<br>AZO<br>BAC<br>BDX<br>BK<br>BSX<br>BTU<br>CAT<br>CB<br>CCL<br>CINF<br>CME<br>COH<br>COP<br>CVH<br>DNR<br>DVN<br>EFX<br>ETN<br>FISV<br>HAS<br>HCP<br>HOT<br>KSS<br>LLL<br>LMT<br>M<br>MAR<br>MFE<br>MHP<br>MHS<br>MRK<br>MRO<br>MWV<br>NEM<br>OMC<br>PCS<br>PHM<br>PKI<br>R<br>RAI<br>SLB<br>TE<br>TWC<br>WHR<br>WIN<br>WPI<br>XTO|9.61<br>62.92<br>45.21<br>179.03<br>18.43<br>78.07<br>31.77<br>7.13<br>47.14<br>67.20<br>52.22<br>40.16<br>29.41<br>322.83<br>41.91<br>56.09<br>24.16<br>17.88<br>66.98<br>35.34<br>78.53<br>52.56<br>39.48<br>32.63<br>50.59<br>56.88<br>94.64<br>84.14<br>23.40<br>34.45<br>40.04<br>34.90<br>63.22<br>36.03<br>32.33<br>26.96<br>53.43<br>41.17<br>7.53<br>11.80<br>23.98<br>44.01<br>54.44<br>67.94<br>16.52<br>53.21<br>97.73<br>11.03<br>42.51<br>48.13|20872996<br>1949337<br>8678723<br>243197<br>164550168<br>1130362<br>6310701<br>25746787<br>5210642<br>6664891<br>1951618<br>4275911<br>688914<br>418955<br>3126469<br>9644544<br>1157022<br>5737740<br>3260982<br>799505<br>1757136<br>1038311<br>1322037<br>2872521<br>3164807<br>3064821<br>670937<br>1416072<br>8324639<br>5014098<br>2469324<br>1954576<br>2798098<br>13930842<br>5035354<br>1035547<br>5673718<br>3357585<br>4424560<br>6834683<br>1268774<br>631889<br>773387<br>9476060<br>1070815<br>1770234<br>1424264<br>2508830<br>895967<br>7219436|417204<br>172942<br>559701<br>43682<br>1529395<br>61029<br>285619<br>309441<br>298616<br>392499<br>149010<br>215427<br>51373<br>38504<br>176795<br>426614<br>79305<br>263173<br>177006<br>62957<br>67989<br>58304<br>86040<br>213045<br>150252<br>128196<br>72818<br>88254<br>491756<br>238190<br>109073<br>102389<br>109382<br>448748<br>341408<br>92825<br>435295<br>150800<br>107967<br>262420<br>78114<br>47422<br>56236<br>440839<br>70318<br>88286<br>134152<br>104887<br>63094<br>612804|6687<br>4095<br>7748<br>1081<br>15008<br>2968<br>5518<br>6768<br>7267<br>8224<br>3601<br>5503<br>1528<br>1412<br>4458<br>8621<br>2213<br>4643<br>5805<br>1945<br>3580<br>2208<br>2672<br>4357<br>5106<br>4936<br>2141<br>3333<br>6469<br>5499<br>3561<br>3261<br>4680<br>7997<br>5522<br>2312<br>7717<br>4359<br>2901<br>4604<br>2127<br>2085<br>2076<br>10286<br>1807<br>3554<br>3348<br>2937<br>2024<br>5040|1<br>2<br>1<br>9<br>1<br>2<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>31<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>2<br>1<br>2<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>2<br>1<br>2<br>2<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>2<br>1<br>1<br>1<br>2<br>4<br>1<br>1<br>1|1<br>5<br>24<br>35<br>1<br>5<br>1<br>1<br>3<br>2<br>2<br>2<br>2<br>103<br>2<br>2<br>2<br>1<br>4<br>3<br>6<br>3<br>2<br>2<br>4<br>3<br>6<br>5<br>1<br>2<br>2<br>2<br>3<br>1<br>1<br>3<br>2<br>2<br>1<br>1<br>2<br>5<br>4<br>2<br>1<br>3<br>9<br>1<br>3<br>7|1035<br>15<br>79<br>7<br>3208<br>15<br>122<br>2965<br>29<br>38<br>43<br>53<br>42<br>5<br>41<br>84<br>38<br>186<br>18<br>39<br>13<br>20<br>34<br>48<br>22<br>27<br>9<br>15<br>176<br>65<br>40<br>42<br>25<br>231<br>143<br>37<br>38<br>65<br>523<br>319<br>72<br>11<br>22<br>39<br>148<br>22<br>10<br>798<br>29<br>225|
|Grand mean||51.75|7512376|223232|4552|2|6|227|



Table 1 presents the average mid-price, daily transaction volume, daily number of best quote updates, daily number of trades, spread and the depth at the best bid and ask for 50 randomly chosen U.S. stocks. All values are calculated from the filtered data, that consists of 21 trading day during April, 2010. 

10 

Table 2. Relation between price changes and order flow imbalance. 

|Ticker|Average results<br><br>|Average results<br><br>|Average results<br><br>|Average results<br><br>|Average results<br><br>|Average results<br><br>|Average results<br><br>|Hypothesis testing|Hypothesis testing|Hypothesis testing|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||ˆ_α_|_t_(ˆ_α_)|ˆ_β_|_t_(ˆ_β_)|ˆ_γQ_|_t_(ˆ_γQ_)|_R_2|_{α _= 0_}_|_{β _= 0_}_|_{γQ _= 0_}_|
|AMD<br>APOL<br>AXP<br>AZO<br>BAC<br>BDX<br>BK<br>BSX<br>BTU<br>CAT<br>CB<br>CCL<br>CINF<br>CME<br>COH<br>COP<br>CVH<br>DNR<br>DVN<br>EFX<br>ETN<br>FISV<br>HAS<br>HCP<br>HOT<br>KSS<br>LLL<br>LMT<br>M<br>MAR<br>MFE<br>MHP<br>MHS<br>MRK<br>MRO<br>MWV<br>NEM<br>OMC<br>PCS<br>PHM<br>PKI<br>R<br>RAI<br>SLB<br>TE<br>TWC<br>WHR<br>WIN<br>WPI<br>XTO|-0.0032<br>0.0038<br>0.0019<br>0.0101<br>-0.0018<br>-0.0008<br>-0.0078<br>0.0000<br>0.0048<br>0.0147<br>-0.0086<br>-0.0067<br>-0.0030<br>0.0506<br>-0.0221<br>-0.0008<br>-0.0034<br>-0.0008<br>0.0112<br>-0.0032<br>-0.0076<br>-0.0002<br>-0.0031<br>-0.0078<br>-0.0012<br>-0.0030<br>0.0160<br>0.0006<br>-0.0010<br>-0.0039<br>0.0087<br>-0.0073<br>-0.0055<br>-0.0065<br>0.0018<br>-0.0011<br>-0.0102<br>-0.0099<br>-0.0006<br>0.0006<br>-0.0004<br>0.0006<br>-0.0070<br>-0.0077<br>0.0011<br>-0.0130<br>0.0628<br>-0.0004<br>-0.0090<br>-0.0088|-0.17<br>0.10<br>0.08<br>0.33<br>-0.09<br>-0.06<br>-0.19<br>-0.01<br>0.12<br>0.23<br>-0.07<br>-0.18<br>-0.02<br>0.05<br>-0.45<br>0.06<br>-0.06<br>-0.04<br>0.18<br>-0.04<br>0.05<br>0.06<br>-0.02<br>-0.17<br>0.05<br>-0.04<br>0.32<br>0.00<br>0.04<br>-0.02<br>0.16<br>-0.13<br>-0.16<br>-0.20<br>0.07<br>0.01<br>-0.22<br>-0.28<br>-0.03<br>0.03<br>-0.03<br>0.03<br>-0.10<br>-0.15<br>0.05<br>-0.13<br>0.63<br>-0.03<br>-0.21<br>-0.18|0.0008<br>0.0555<br>0.0082<br>0.1619<br>0.0002<br>0.0536<br>0.0069<br>0.0003<br>0.0242<br>0.0194<br>0.0191<br>0.0140<br>0.0260<br>0.6262<br>0.0179<br>0.0084<br>0.0217<br>0.0045<br>0.0370<br>0.0222<br>0.0712<br>0.0397<br>0.0222<br>0.0150<br>0.0345<br>0.0317<br>0.1000<br>0.0520<br>0.0043<br>0.0121<br>0.0205<br>0.0211<br>0.0334<br>0.0032<br>0.0058<br>0.0205<br>0.0170<br>0.0144<br>0.0015<br>0.0027<br>0.0102<br>0.0667<br>0.0396<br>0.0198<br>0.0049<br>0.0384<br>0.1278<br>0.0009<br>0.0270<br>0.0029|9.96<br>10.32<br>13.87<br>6.39<br>18.36<br>10.08<br>14.97<br>6.12<br>14.51<br>14.85<br>11.97<br>13.88<br>10.73<br>4.98<br>12.75<br>12.50<br>10.83<br>12.76<br>11.48<br>8.71<br>10.51<br>10.42<br>11.45<br>13.60<br>12.64<br>13.82<br>11.76<br>13.58<br>15.82<br>14.61<br>12.72<br>11.62<br>11.70<br>12.53<br>13.67<br>11.79<br>13.81<br>11.88<br>5.21<br>10.33<br>7.25<br>10.14<br>10.40<br>16.76<br>6.66<br>11.80<br>10.26<br>3.12<br>10.47<br>13.28|1.4E-07<br>-2.2E-04<br>-3.8E-06<br>-9.3E-04<br>1.9E-09<br>-1.1E-04<br>-4.0E-06<br>7.8E-08<br>-3.5E-05<br>-1.9E-05<br>-3.5E-07<br>-1.2E-05<br>-7.0E-06<br>-7.2E-03<br>-1.7E-05<br>-5.8E-06<br>7.6E-06<br>-1.3E-07<br>-1.0E-04<br>6.4E-05<br>-2.3E-04<br>-2.3E-05<br>4.7E-06<br>-1.4E-05<br>-7.2E-05<br>-5.4E-05<br>-3.8E-04<br>-1.2E-04<br>8.8E-08<br>-4.1E-06<br>-3.8E-05<br>5.8E-06<br>-8.3E-05<br>-5.4E-07<br>-3.6E-07<br>-1.7E-05<br>-1.9E-05<br>-4.5E-06<br>1.8E-06<br>8.4E-07<br>4.1E-05<br>3.7E-05<br>2.6E-05<br>-1.8E-05<br>1.4E-05<br>-5.6E-05<br>-3.3E-04<br>1.5E-06<br>2.9E-05<br>2.7E-07|0.68<br>-1.17<br>-0.88<br>-0.89<br>0.01<br>-0.38<br>-0.57<br>1.14<br>-1.26<br>-1.13<br>0.00<br>-0.64<br>0.27<br>-0.99<br>-0.77<br>-1.17<br>0.20<br>0.19<br>-1.59<br>0.64<br>-1.14<br>-0.19<br>0.21<br>-0.46<br>-1.21<br>-0.80<br>-0.75<br>-0.98<br>0.13<br>-0.23<br>-0.38<br>0.14<br>-1.10<br>-0.38<br>0.22<br>-0.25<br>-1.36<br>-0.01<br>1.01<br>0.55<br>1.10<br>0.01<br>0.01<br>-1.15<br>1.45<br>-0.44<br>-0.80<br>0.76<br>0.28<br>0.30|64%<br>63%<br>69%<br>47%<br>79%<br>63%<br>74%<br>58%<br>72%<br>71%<br>64%<br>70%<br>70%<br>35%<br>69%<br>68%<br>65%<br>69%<br>65%<br>56%<br>65%<br>63%<br>67%<br>67%<br>68%<br>71%<br>67%<br>72%<br>75%<br>71%<br>68%<br>68%<br>66%<br>69%<br>69%<br>68%<br>71%<br>65%<br>53%<br>66%<br>53%<br>63%<br>66%<br>76%<br>54%<br>64%<br>65%<br>44%<br>66%<br>65%|0%<br>12%<br>11%<br>23%<br>1%<br>9%<br>3%<br>0%<br>11%<br>12%<br>5%<br>3%<br>1%<br>15%<br>2%<br>10%<br>3%<br>1%<br>17%<br>1%<br>14%<br>4%<br>3%<br>2%<br>10%<br>10%<br>14%<br>14%<br>0%<br>3%<br>7%<br>2%<br>9%<br>1%<br>5%<br>3%<br>8%<br>2%<br>0%<br>1%<br>2%<br>8%<br>5%<br>7%<br>2%<br>8%<br>22%<br>1%<br>3%<br>0%|98%<br>91%<br>100%<br>97%<br>100%<br>100%<br>100%<br>81%<br>100%<br>99%<br>100%<br>99%<br>98%<br>94%<br>100%<br>100%<br>99%<br>99%<br>97%<br>98%<br>98%<br>100%<br>100%<br>100%<br>99%<br>98%<br>96%<br>100%<br>100%<br>100%<br>100%<br>99%<br>99%<br>100%<br>100%<br>100%<br>100%<br>99%<br>79%<br>98%<br>94%<br>98%<br>100%<br>100%<br>86%<br>99%<br>97%<br>60%<br>98%<br>100%|22%<br>4%<br>5%<br>3%<br>8%<br>8%<br>6%<br>22%<br>3%<br>3%<br>8%<br>7%<br>16%<br>2%<br>3%<br>3%<br>10%<br>13%<br>0%<br>18%<br>1%<br>8%<br>16%<br>6%<br>2%<br>3%<br>3%<br>1%<br>12%<br>4%<br>7%<br>11%<br>3%<br>8%<br>13%<br>7%<br>2%<br>13%<br>24%<br>21%<br>29%<br>10%<br>11%<br>1%<br>30%<br>5%<br>4%<br>15%<br>14%<br>18%|
|Average|0.0002|-0.02|0.0398|11.47|-2.0E-04|-0.28|65%|6%|97%|9%|



Table 2 presents a cross-section of results (averaged across time) for the regressions: 

∆ _Pk_ = _α_ ˆ _i_ + _β_[ˆ] _iOFIk_ + ˆ _ϵk_ , ∆ _Pk_ = _α_ ˆ _Q,i_ + _β_[ˆ] _Q,iOFIk_ + ˆ _γQ,iOFIk|OFIk|_ + ˆ _ϵQ,k_ , 

where ∆ _Pk_ are the 10-second mid-price changes and _OFIk_ are the contemporaneous order flow imbalances. These regressions were estimated using 273 half-hour subsamples (indexed by _i_ ) for each stock and their outputs were averaged across subsamples. Each subsample typically contains about 180 observations (indexed by _k_ ). The t-statistics were computed using White’s standard errors. For brevity, we report the _R_[2] , the average _α_ ˆ _i_ and the average _β_[ˆ] _i_ only for the first regression (with a single _OFIk_ term). There is almost no difference between averages of estimates _β_[ˆ] _i_ and _β_ ˆ _Qi_ and the _R_[2] in two regressions. The last three columns report the percentage of samples where the coefficient(s) passed the z-test at the 5% significance level. 

11 

Next, we estimate the parameters _λ_ and _c_ in (3). For each stock, we first obtain _λ_[ˆ] fit via a loglinear regression: 

**==> picture [300 x 15] intentionally omitted <==**

Then, using _λ_[ˆ] , we estimate _c_ in a linear regression: 

**==> picture [286 x 30] intentionally omitted <==**

Both regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares. The results are presented in Table 3: the quality of these fits convincingly demonstrates that the instantaneous price impact (measured by _β_[ˆ] _i_ ) is inversely related to market depth. There are three stocks with bad fits (namely APOL, AZO and CME) and we note that they also have wide spreads and low values of depth. It is possible that for these stocks other factors, such as the presence of hidden orders and depth beyond the best price levels the order book may dominate the instantaneous price impact. The intercept _α_ ˆ _L,i_ is highly statistically significant (being an estimate of parameter _c_ ) and _αM,i_ ˆ , which is included to absorb the means, is mostly insignificant. Since the residuals of these regressions appear to be autocorrelated, the t-statistics and confidence intervals in Table 3 are computed with Newey-West standard errors.ˆ Coinciding with our intuition for (1), estimates _λ_ are very close to 1 across stocks and the hypothesis _{λ_ = 1 _}_ cannot be rejected for 35 out of 50 stocks. The restricted model (with _λ_ = 1) also demonstrates a good quality of fit, making ˆ this a good approximation. However, the coefficient _c_ is generally different from _c_ =[1] 2[in][(1).] Lower values of _c_ ˆ mean that mid-prices are (on average) more resilient to the incoming orders than indicated by _ADi_ (which is only a rough measure of market depth). In summary, _λ_ = 1 appears to be a good approximation for most of the stocks and only the constant _c_ needs to be calibrated to the data. The general case of regression (5) is illustrated on Figure 4 by a scatter plot for a representative stock. 

**==> picture [341 x 248] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 4: Log-log scatter plot of the price impact coefficient estimate _β_[ˆ] _i_ against average market depth _ADi_ for the Schlumberger stock (SLB). 

12 

Table 3. Relation between the price impact coefficient and market depth. 

|Ticker|Parameter estimates|Parameter estimates|Parameter estimates|Parameter estimates|5% confdence intervals|5% confdence intervals|5% confdence intervals|5% confdence intervals|Fit measures<br><br>|Fit measures<br><br>|Fit measures<br><br>|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||ˆ_c_|ˆ_λ_|_t_(ˆ_c_)|_t_(ˆ_λ_)|ˆ_cl_|ˆ_cu_|ˆ_λl_|ˆ_λu_|_R_2|_corr_[ˆ_β,_ ˆˆ_β_]2|_corr_[ˆ_β,_ ˆˆ_β∗_]2|
|AMD<br>APOL<br>AXP<br>AZO<br>BAC<br>BDX<br>BK<br>BSX<br>BTU<br>CAT<br>CB<br>CCL<br>CINF<br>CME<br>COH<br>COP<br>CVH<br>DNR<br>DVN<br>EFX<br>ETN<br>FISV<br>HAS<br>HCP<br>HOT<br>KSS<br>LLL<br>LMT<br>M<br>MAR<br>MFE<br>MHP<br>MHS<br>MRK<br>MRO<br>MWV<br>NEM<br>OMC<br>PCS<br>PHM<br>PKI<br>R<br>RAI<br>SLB<br>TE<br>TWC<br>WHR<br>WIN<br>WPI<br>XTO|0.23<br>0.27<br>0.14<br>0.39<br>0.27<br>0.38<br>0.21<br>0.35<br>0.42<br>0.29<br>0.32<br>0.26<br>0.31<br>1.27<br>0.37<br>0.13<br>0.32<br>0.23<br>0.26<br>0.30<br>0.45<br>0.34<br>0.32<br>0.19<br>0.44<br>0.39<br>0.43<br>0.50<br>0.19<br>0.28<br>0.31<br>0.27<br>0.53<br>0.13<br>0.23<br>0.32<br>0.26<br>0.30<br>0.30<br>0.28<br>0.30<br>0.37<br>0.35<br>0.35<br>0.21<br>0.37<br>0.78<br>5.81<br>0.27<br>0.31|0.94<br>0.36<br>0.83<br>0.67<br>0.96<br>1.04<br>0.92<br>0.98<br>1.12<br>0.96<br>1.02<br>0.96<br>0.97<br>0.50<br>1.05<br>0.80<br>1.03<br>0.96<br>0.91<br>0.99<br>1.07<br>1.01<br>1.00<br>0.89<br>1.12<br>1.05<br>1.01<br>1.14<br>0.90<br>0.98<br>1.01<br>0.94<br>1.16<br>0.81<br>0.94<br>1.05<br>0.98<br>0.96<br>1.02<br>0.98<br>1.07<br>1.02<br>1.03<br>1.06<br>1.00<br>1.04<br>1.18<br>1.60<br>0.92<br>1.04|27.74<br>4.43<br>13.95<br>5.48<br>25.27<br>22.83<br>17.52<br>14.98<br>40.90<br>21.70<br>27.08<br>24.36<br>20.05<br>2.55<br>15.29<br>8.52<br>26.50<br>32.44<br>13.50<br>20.16<br>11.51<br>23.35<br>26.36<br>22.93<br>19.53<br>24.40<br>13.21<br>7.31<br>37.41<br>22.58<br>20.28<br>19.60<br>17.03<br>18.07<br>35.54<br>28.07<br>18.79<br>29.47<br>21.27<br>36.43<br>26.59<br>18.51<br>24.94<br>18.98<br>16.18<br>17.70<br>9.24<br>16.09<br>19.33<br>30.85|23.11<br>1.05<br>26.48<br>5.10<br>19.74<br>18.64<br>54.54<br>24.55<br>36.77<br>16.87<br>49.61<br>37.55<br>47.39<br>1.99<br>36.65<br>15.95<br>37.51<br>40.90<br>16.66<br>26.13<br>17.34<br>30.70<br>46.00<br>51.27<br>26.59<br>33.17<br>14.45<br>13.49<br>57.39<br>50.20<br>46.20<br>33.62<br>34.25<br>32.20<br>49.68<br>37.81<br>25.97<br>17.76<br>18.73<br>35.12<br>38.35<br>15.76<br>40.46<br>40.60<br>24.28<br>15.96<br>11.54<br>11.70<br>28.99<br>39.51|0.22<br>0.15<br>0.12<br>0.25<br>0.25<br>0.35<br>0.19<br>0.31<br>0.40<br>0.27<br>0.30<br>0.24<br>0.28<br>0.29<br>0.32<br>0.10<br>0.29<br>0.22<br>0.22<br>0.27<br>0.38<br>0.31<br>0.30<br>0.17<br>0.40<br>0.36<br>0.37<br>0.37<br>0.18<br>0.25<br>0.28<br>0.24<br>0.47<br>0.11<br>0.21<br>0.30<br>0.23<br>0.28<br>0.27<br>0.26<br>0.28<br>0.33<br>0.32<br>0.31<br>0.18<br>0.33<br>0.61<br>5.11<br>0.24<br>0.29|0.25<br>0.39<br>0.16<br>0.53<br>0.29<br>0.41<br>0.24<br>0.40<br>0.44<br>0.32<br>0.34<br>0.29<br>0.34<br>2.24<br>0.43<br>0.16<br>0.34<br>0.24<br>0.30<br>0.33<br>0.53<br>0.36<br>0.34<br>0.21<br>0.48<br>0.42<br>0.50<br>0.64<br>0.20<br>0.30<br>0.34<br>0.30<br>0.59<br>0.14<br>0.24<br>0.34<br>0.28<br>0.32<br>0.33<br>0.29<br>0.32<br>0.41<br>0.38<br>0.38<br>0.24<br>0.42<br>0.94<br>6.52<br>0.30<br>0.33|0.86<br>-0.32<br>0.77<br>0.41<br>0.90<br>0.93<br>0.88<br>0.90<br>1.06<br>0.85<br>0.98<br>0.91<br>0.93<br>0.01<br>0.98<br>0.70<br>0.98<br>0.92<br>0.80<br>0.92<br>0.95<br>0.94<br>0.96<br>0.86<br>1.04<br>0.99<br>0.87<br>0.98<br>0.87<br>0.94<br>0.96<br>0.89<br>1.10<br>0.76<br>0.91<br>1.00<br>0.91<br>0.85<br>0.90<br>0.93<br>1.00<br>0.90<br>0.98<br>1.01<br>0.92<br>0.91<br>0.98<br>1.33<br>0.86<br>0.98|1.02<br>1.04<br>0.89<br>0.92<br>1.03<br>1.15<br>0.95<br>1.05<br>1.18<br>1.07<br>1.06<br>1.01<br>1.01<br>0.99<br>1.12<br>0.89<br>1.08<br>1.01<br>1.02<br>1.07<br>1.19<br>1.07<br>1.05<br>0.93<br>1.20<br>1.11<br>1.14<br>1.31<br>0.93<br>1.02<br>1.05<br>1.00<br>1.23<br>0.86<br>0.98<br>1.10<br>1.05<br>1.06<br>1.14<br>1.04<br>1.13<br>1.15<br>1.08<br>1.12<br>1.09<br>1.16<br>1.38<br>1.87<br>0.98<br>1.09|78%<br>2%<br>84%<br>13%<br>76%<br>71%<br>93%<br>73%<br>87%<br>87%<br>92%<br>87%<br>92%<br>2%<br>77%<br>75%<br>89%<br>91%<br>45%<br>84%<br>60%<br>84%<br>89%<br>94%<br>82%<br>85%<br>51%<br>60%<br>94%<br>92%<br>91%<br>82%<br>85%<br>87%<br>94%<br>90%<br>81%<br>83%<br>53%<br>86%<br>82%<br>57%<br>86%<br>91%<br>70%<br>72%<br>44%<br>28%<br>78%<br>89%|86%<br>30%<br>76%<br>17%<br>87%<br>68%<br>91%<br>81%<br>83%<br>83%<br>89%<br>83%<br>88%<br>4%<br>75%<br>66%<br>89%<br>89%<br>56%<br>79%<br>56%<br>77%<br>83%<br>90%<br>80%<br>78%<br>58%<br>52%<br>92%<br>88%<br>86%<br>74%<br>81%<br>81%<br>93%<br>85%<br>77%<br>85%<br>82%<br>90%<br>88%<br>58%<br>76%<br>88%<br>86%<br>79%<br>43%<br>71%<br>76%<br>91%|86%<br>31%<br>76%<br>16%<br>87%<br>68%<br>90%<br>81%<br>83%<br>83%<br>89%<br>83%<br>88%<br>3%<br>75%<br>66%<br>89%<br>89%<br>56%<br>79%<br>56%<br>77%<br>83%<br>90%<br>79%<br>78%<br>58%<br>52%<br>92%<br>88%<br>86%<br>74%<br>80%<br>81%<br>93%<br>85%<br>77%<br>85%<br>82%<br>90%<br>87%<br>58%<br>76%<br>88%<br>86%<br>79%<br>42%<br>71%<br>76%<br>91%|
|Grand mean|0.45|0.98|20.74|29.53|0.38|0.52|0.88|1.08|74%|75%|75%|



Table 3 presents the results of regressions: 

log _β_ ˆ _i_ = _β_[ˆ] _iα_ = _M,i_ ˆ _α_ + _L,i_ ˆ _−ADc_ ˆ _λ_[ˆ] _i[λ]_[ˆ] log+ ˆ _ADϵM,ii_ + ˆ, _ϵL,i_ , 

where _β_[ˆ] _i_ is the price impact coefficient for the _i_ -th half-hour subsample and _ADi_ is the average market depth for that subsample. These regressions were estimated for each of the 50 stocks, using 273 estimates of _β_[ˆ] _i_ for that stock, obtained from (4). The second regression uses estimates _λ_[ˆ] obtained from the first regression. The t-statistics and the confidence intervals were computed using Newey-West standard errors. Confidence intervals are built with normal critical values. The last three columns provide three alternative fit measures - the _R_[2] of the linear regression (5), the squared correlation between _β_[ˆ] _i_ and fitted values _β_[ˆˆ] _i_ = _ADc_ ˆ _i[λ]_[ˆ] and the squared correlation between _β_[ˆ] _i_ and _β_[ˆˆ] _i[∗]_[=] _ADc_ ˆ _i_[.] 

13 

## **3.3 Intraday patterns** 

The link that we established between the price impact and the market depth has an important implication. Since the market depth follows a predictable pattern of intraday seasonality ([1], [31]), the price impact coefficient must also have a _predictable_ intraday pattern. To demonstrate it, we averaged _β_[ˆ] _i_ for each stock and each half-hour interval across days, resulting in the intraday seasonality pattern for that stock, normalized these values by the average _β_[ˆ] _i_ of that stock and averaged the normalized seasonality patterns across stocks. The same procedure was repeated for _ADi_ and the results are shown on Figure 5. 

**==> picture [341 x 248] intentionally omitted <==**

Figure 5: Intraday patterns in the price impact coefficient _β_[ˆ] _i_ and the average depth _ADi_ . 

Near the market open, depth is two times lower than it is on average, indicating that the order book is relatively shallow. In a shallow market, the incoming orders can easily affect the mid-price and the price impact coefficient is two times higher near the market open than on average. Moreover, price impact is five times higher at the market open compared to the market close. 

The intraday pattern in price impact can be used to explain the intraday patterns in price volatility, observed by many researchers ([1], [4], [21], [33]). Similarly to the price impact coefficient and the market depth, we computed the intraday patterns in variances of ∆ _Pk_ and _OFIk_ , using half-hour subsamples (indexed by _i_ ). Taking the variance on both sides of equation (2) demonstrates the link between _var_ [∆ _Pk_ ] _i_ , _var_ [ _OFIk_ ] _i_ and _βi_ : 

**==> picture [315 x 13] intentionally omitted <==**

The average patterns are plotted on Figure 6. Notice that the price volatility has a sharp peak near the market open, while the volatility of order flow imbalance has a peak near the market close. This peak is, however, offset by a low price impact, which gradually declines throughoutˆ the day. For the _i_ -th half-hour interval, the equation (7) implies that _var_ [∆ _Pk_ ] _i ≈ βi_[2] _[var]_[[] _[OFI][k]_[]] _[i]_[which][is][demonstrated][on][Figure][6][4][.] 

> 4 ˆ _βi_ 2 _[var]_[[] _[OFI][k]_[]] _[i]_[was][computed][from][the][average][patterns][of] _[β]_[ˆ] _[i]_[and] _[var]_[[] _[OFI][k]_[]] _[i]_ 

14 

**==> picture [341 x 248] intentionally omitted <==**

_β_ Figureˆ _i_ and the6: Intradayexpressionseasonality _βi_[2] _[var]_[[] _[OFI]_ in _[k]_ variances[]] _[i]_[.] _var_ [∆ _Pk_ ] _i_ , _var_ [ _OFIk_ ] _i_ , the price impact coefficient 

The intraday pattern in price variance was explained by Madhavan et al. [33] in terms of a structural model. They argued that the volatility is higher in the morning because of the higher inflow of both public and private information. Similarly, Hasbrouck [21] argued that the peak of price volatility at market open is mostly due to higher intensity of public information. Both studies agree that the impact of trades is larger in the morning. Our model contributes to this discussion by explaining the peak of price volatility using tangible quantities, rather than unobservable parameters. We also argue that the price impact of trades and the information asymmetry may be, in fact, two sides of the same coin. 

First, we associate the higher volatility of order flow imbalance at market the open and close with a higher rate of trading, that is, higher inflow of public and private information. Second, if the bid-ask spread is small (it is mostly equal to 1 cent in our data), limit order traders may avoid being “picked off” only by lowering the number of submitted orders, reducing the depth. Therefore, if limit order traders are aware of information asymmetry in the morning, the low depth may simply indicate this asymmetry. In our model, low depth also implies a higher price impact, making the information advantages harder to realize at the market open. 

15 

## **4 Price impact of trades** 

## **4.1 Trade imbalance vs order imbalance** 

The previous section discussed the linear relation between price changes and _OFIk_ - our measure of supply/demand imbalance. However, little has been said about trade imbalances, which are widely used in the academic literature [10, 20, 22, 24, 29, 38] and in practice [43]. The aim of this section is to compare the price impact of trades and order flow imbalance and show that the (nonlinear) price impact of trade volume may be derived from our linear model for the price impact of order flow. 

For convenience we will call ‘buy trade’ a transaction initiated by a market buy order and ‘sell trade’ a transaction initiated by a market sell order. We define the _trade imbalance_ during a time interval [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ] as the difference between volumes of buy and sell trades during that interval: 

**==> picture [182 x 38] intentionally omitted <==**

Here, _bn_ is the size of a buyer-initiated trade that occurs at the _n_ -th quote; _bn_ = 0 if no buy trade occurs at that quote. Similarly, _sn_ is the size of a sell trade that occurs at the _n_ -th quote or zero. The procedure that matches trades with quotes and classifies them as buys or sells is described in the Appendix. 

To compare the explanatory power of trade and order flow imbalances with respect to price changes, we perform the following regressions: 

**==> picture [287 x 14] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [295 x 15] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [325 x 14] intentionally omitted <==**

The regressions are estimated separately for every half-hour subsample of data (indexed by _i_ ). If the effect of trades is included in the order flow imbalance, the coefficients _θ_[ˆ] _T,i_ in (8c) must be indistinguishable from zero. We note that regressions (8a-8c) contain only the linear terms, because we found no evidence of non-linear price impacts in our data (for neither _OFIk_ nor _TIk_ ). The average results of these regressions are presented in Panel A of Table 4. Clearly, when _OFIk_ and _TIk_ are taken individually, each of them has a statistically significant influence on price changes. Comparing the two we observe that _OFIk_ explains price changes better than _TIk_ - the average _R_[2] for order flow imbalance is 65% compared to 32% for the trade imbalance. When two variables are used together to explain price changes, the dependence on trade imbalance becomes questionable. The average t-statistic of _TIk_ decreases by a factor of four and the coefficients _θ_[ˆ] _T,i_ are statistically significant in only 31% of subsamples. However, the dependence on _OFIk_ remains convincingly strong. 

Our findings show that: 

1. The order flow imbalance _OFIk_ explains price movements better than the imbalance of trades. 

2. The effect of trade imbalance is adequately included in _OFIk_ , a more general measure of supply/demand imbalance. 

16 

Table 4. Comparison of order flow imbalance and trade imbalance. 

||Table 4. Comparison of order fow imbalance and trade imbalance.|Table 4. Comparison of order fow imbalance and trade imbalance.|Table 4. Comparison of order fow imbalance and trade imbalance.|
|---|---|---|---|
||Panel A: Detailed results for changes in mid prices|||
|Ticker|Order fow imbalance<br>|Trade imbalance<br>|Both covariates<br><br>|
||_R_2<br>_t_(ˆ_β_)<br>_{β _= 0_}_<br>_F_|_R_2<br>_t_(ˆ_βT_)<br>_{βT _= 0_}_<br>_F_|_R_2<br>_t_(ˆ_θO_)<br>_t_(ˆ_θT_)<br>_{θO _= 0_}_<br>_{θT _= 0_}_<br>_F_|
|AMD<br>APOL<br>AXP<br>AZO<br>BAC<br>BDX<br>BK<br>BSX<br>BTU<br>CAT<br>CB<br>CCL<br>CINF<br>CME<br>COH<br>COP<br>CVH<br>DNR<br>DVN<br>EFX<br>ETN<br>FISV<br>HAS<br>HCP<br>HOT<br>KSS<br>LLL<br>LMT<br>M<br>MAR<br>MFE<br>MHP<br>MHS<br>MRK<br>MRO<br>MWV<br>NEM<br>OMC<br>PCS<br>PHM<br>PKI<br>R<br>RAI<br>SLB<br>TE<br>TWC<br>WHR<br>WIN<br>WPI<br>XTO|64%<br>9.96<br>98%<br>382<br>63%<br>10.32<br>91%<br>396<br>69%<br>13.87<br>100%<br>449<br>47%<br>6.39<br>97%<br>179<br>79%<br>18.36<br>100%<br>774<br>63%<br>10.08<br>100%<br>362<br>74%<br>14.97<br>100%<br>610<br>58%<br>6.12<br>81%<br>338<br>72%<br>14.51<br>100%<br>527<br>71%<br>14.85<br>99%<br>498<br>64%<br>11.97<br>100%<br>378<br>70%<br>13.88<br>99%<br>478<br>70%<br>10.73<br>98%<br>552<br>35%<br>4.98<br>94%<br>112<br>69%<br>12.75<br>100%<br>457<br>68%<br>12.50<br>100%<br>450<br>65%<br>10.83<br>99%<br>418<br>69%<br>12.76<br>99%<br>471<br>65%<br>11.48<br>97%<br>414<br>56%<br>8.71<br>98%<br>289<br>65%<br>10.51<br>98%<br>389<br>63%<br>10.42<br>100%<br>380<br>67%<br>11.45<br>100%<br>427<br>67%<br>13.60<br>100%<br>417<br>68%<br>12.64<br>99%<br>438<br>71%<br>13.82<br>98%<br>525<br>67%<br>11.76<br>96%<br>485<br>72%<br>13.58<br>100%<br>516<br>75%<br>15.82<br>100%<br>640<br>71%<br>14.61<br>100%<br>498<br>68%<br>12.72<br>100%<br>463<br>68%<br>11.62<br>99%<br>489<br>66%<br>11.70<br>99%<br>414<br>69%<br>12.53<br>100%<br>451<br>69%<br>13.67<br>100%<br>465<br>68%<br>11.79<br>100%<br>452<br>71%<br>13.81<br>100%<br>490<br>65%<br>11.88<br>99%<br>411<br>53%<br>5.21<br>79%<br>297<br>66%<br>10.33<br>98%<br>416<br>53%<br>7.25<br>94%<br>263<br>63%<br>10.14<br>98%<br>352<br>66%<br>10.40<br>100%<br>422<br>76%<br>16.76<br>100%<br>644<br>54%<br>6.66<br>86%<br>301<br>64%<br>11.80<br>99%<br>377<br>65%<br>10.26<br>97%<br>394<br>44%<br>3.12<br>60%<br>243<br>66%<br>10.47<br>98%<br>437<br>65%<br>13.28<br>100%<br>399|39%<br>4.15<br>86%<br>140<br>30%<br>4.14<br>84%<br>83<br>34%<br>4.72<br>83%<br>101<br>30%<br>4.09<br>90%<br>87<br>45%<br>6.31<br>96%<br>157<br>28%<br>4.02<br>82%<br>79<br>36%<br>4.58<br>81%<br>117<br>31%<br>2.57<br>54%<br>106<br>35%<br>5.21<br>88%<br>103<br>33%<br>5.01<br>86%<br>94<br>33%<br>4.66<br>88%<br>102<br>32%<br>4.55<br>85%<br>93<br>39%<br>4.26<br>87%<br>141<br>24%<br>3.39<br>75%<br>63<br>29%<br>3.91<br>82%<br>80<br>35%<br>4.92<br>84%<br>107<br>35%<br>4.10<br>84%<br>114<br>32%<br>3.98<br>81%<br>101<br>33%<br>4.83<br>88%<br>96<br>31%<br>3.72<br>80%<br>101<br>25%<br>3.59<br>71%<br>69<br>28%<br>3.79<br>81%<br>79<br>32%<br>4.04<br>84%<br>97<br>31%<br>4.43<br>82%<br>91<br>27%<br>3.86<br>77%<br>74<br>31%<br>4.43<br>81%<br>91<br>36%<br>5.07<br>90%<br>117<br>35%<br>4.89<br>90%<br>105<br>35%<br>4.41<br>84%<br>108<br>34%<br>4.77<br>89%<br>105<br>31%<br>4.17<br>82%<br>93<br>31%<br>3.85<br>84%<br>96<br>28%<br>4.03<br>77%<br>80<br>31%<br>4.08<br>82%<br>93<br>35%<br>4.66<br>89%<br>104<br>34%<br>4.37<br>86%<br>102<br>34%<br>4.99<br>81%<br>100<br>30%<br>4.14<br>85%<br>88<br>35%<br>2.68<br>59%<br>169<br>35%<br>3.87<br>84%<br>115<br>28%<br>3.03<br>70%<br>89<br>27%<br>3.92<br>86%<br>71<br>36%<br>4.67<br>89%<br>111<br>32%<br>4.54<br>79%<br>94<br>37%<br>3.27<br>67%<br>175<br>31%<br>4.26<br>77%<br>93<br>29%<br>4.29<br>88%<br>85<br>41%<br>2.68<br>54%<br>249<br>32%<br>3.91<br>83%<br>100<br>21%<br>3.05<br>63%<br>54|67%<br>6.49<br>1.26<br>93%<br>34%<br>214<br>66%<br>8.00<br>1.09<br>89%<br>26%<br>211<br>71%<br>10.05<br>1.50<br>100%<br>44%<br>241<br>54%<br>5.02<br>2.34<br>96%<br>68%<br>118<br>80%<br>12.55<br>0.72<br>99%<br>19%<br>397<br>65%<br>7.88<br>1.23<br>97%<br>34%<br>195<br>75%<br>10.68<br>0.68<br>99%<br>17%<br>313<br>62%<br>4.51<br>0.57<br>73%<br>12%<br>189<br>74%<br>10.90<br>1.31<br>99%<br>32%<br>277<br>72%<br>11.27<br>1.28<br>99%<br>38%<br>262<br>66%<br>8.42<br>1.34<br>99%<br>37%<br>202<br>71%<br>10.50<br>0.98<br>99%<br>26%<br>247<br>72%<br>7.17<br>1.01<br>96%<br>27%<br>297<br>44%<br>4.10<br>2.18<br>92%<br>59%<br>78<br>70%<br>10.06<br>0.87<br>100%<br>22%<br>238<br>70%<br>9.19<br>1.42<br>100%<br>40%<br>240<br>67%<br>7.30<br>1.01<br>97%<br>25%<br>222<br>70%<br>9.29<br>1.01<br>97%<br>24%<br>246<br>68%<br>8.58<br>1.70<br>93%<br>48%<br>226<br>60%<br>6.21<br>1.64<br>96%<br>43%<br>167<br>67%<br>8.66<br>1.04<br>98%<br>29%<br>209<br>65%<br>8.12<br>0.88<br>100%<br>25%<br>201<br>68%<br>8.53<br>0.89<br>100%<br>24%<br>223<br>68%<br>10.01<br>1.05<br>100%<br>32%<br>217<br>70%<br>9.94<br>1.17<br>99%<br>29%<br>231<br>72%<br>10.83<br>0.94<br>97%<br>25%<br>274<br>70%<br>8.58<br>1.63<br>94%<br>44%<br>270<br>73%<br>10.19<br>1.50<br>99%<br>40%<br>277<br>76%<br>11.38<br>0.97<br>100%<br>26%<br>330<br>72%<br>10.45<br>1.05<br>100%<br>27%<br>258<br>69%<br>9.06<br>0.73<br>99%<br>18%<br>239<br>70%<br>8.92<br>0.77<br>98%<br>19%<br>257<br>68%<br>9.10<br>1.11<br>99%<br>27%<br>218<br>70%<br>9.20<br>0.76<br>100%<br>20%<br>235<br>70%<br>9.73<br>0.91<br>100%<br>24%<br>241<br>69%<br>8.63<br>0.80<br>100%<br>24%<br>237<br>72%<br>10.24<br>1.53<br>99%<br>43%<br>260<br>67%<br>8.99<br>0.96<br>99%<br>24%<br>216<br>58%<br>3.44<br>0.86<br>71%<br>20%<br>195<br>68%<br>7.28<br>0.95<br>93%<br>29%<br>224<br>57%<br>5.39<br>1.24<br>88%<br>32%<br>148<br>65%<br>8.07<br>1.20<br>97%<br>30%<br>188<br>68%<br>7.52<br>1.11<br>99%<br>31%<br>224<br>77%<br>13.02<br>1.24<br>100%<br>36%<br>336<br>60%<br>4.34<br>1.32<br>79%<br>29%<br>200<br>66%<br>8.46<br>1.34<br>99%<br>37%<br>201<br>67%<br>8.17<br>1.43<br>96%<br>39%<br>217<br>58%<br>1.78<br>1.39<br>42%<br>29%<br>206<br>68%<br>7.82<br>1.05<br>97%<br>30%<br>232<br>66%<br>10.72<br>1.05<br>100%<br>27%<br>209|
|Grand mean|65%<br>11.47<br>97%<br>429|32%<br>4.18<br>81%<br>103|67%<br>8.49<br>1.16<br>95%<br>31%<br>231|
||Panel B: Average results for changes in transaction prices|||
|_L_= 2 trades<br>_L_= 5 trades<br>_L_= 10 trades|14%<br>15.74<br>98%<br>464<br>38%<br>19.42<br>98%<br>753<br>51%<br>17.78<br>98%<br>655|1%<br>2.69<br>63%<br>26<br>8%<br>4.50<br>75%<br>113<br>13%<br>4.55<br>75%<br>100|15%<br>14.17<br>-2.58<br>98%<br>54%<br>245<br>39%<br>16.85<br>-0.20<br>98%<br>9%<br>379<br>51%<br>14.97<br>0.57<br>98%<br>9%<br>329|



Table 4 presents the average results of regressions: ∆ _Pk_ = _α_ ˆ _i_ + _β_[ˆ] _iOF Ik_ + _ϵ_ ˆ _k_ , ∆ _Pk_ = _α_ ˆ _T,i_ + _β_[ˆ] _T,iT Ik_ + _ϵ_ ˆ _T,k_ , ∆ _Pk_ = _α_ ˆ _D,i_ + _θ_[ˆ] _O,iOF Ik_ + _θ_[ˆ] _T,iT Ik_ + _ϵ_ ˆ _D,k_ , where ∆ _Pk_ are the 10-second mid-price changes (Panel A) or changes in trade prices between _L_ trades (Panel B), _OF Ik_ are the contemporaneous order flow imbalances and _T Ik_ are the contemporaneous trade imbalances. For Panel A, these regressions were estimated using 273 half-hour subsamples (indexed by _i_ ) for each stock and their outputs were averaged across subsamples. Each subsample typically contains about 180 observations (indexed by _k_ ). For Panel B, data was pooled across half-hour subsamples, resulting in 13 subsamples for each stock. The t-statistics were computed using White’s standard errors. For each of three regressions, Table 4 reports the average _R_[2] , the average t- statistic of the coefficient(s), the percentage of samples where the coefficient(s) passed the z-test at the 5% significance level and the F-statistic of the regression. The outputs for Panel B were averaged across stocks. 

17 

As a robustness check, we repeated regressions (8a-8c) with differences between transaction prices _Pk[t]_[instead][of][differences][in][mid-prices] _[P][k]_[.][This][time][price][differences][were][computed][in] _trade time_ as ∆ _LPk[t]_[=] _[ P][ t] k[−][P][ t] k−L_[for] _[L]_[trades.][The][average][results][across][five][stocks,][picked][at] random[5] are presented in Panel B of Table 4. Our findings for transaction prices are essentially the same as for mid prices - _OFIk_ explains price changes better than _TIk_ . Moreover, the effect of trades on prices seems to be captured by the order flow imbalance. The variable _TIk_ becomes statistically insignificant when used together with _OFIk_ in the regression and the increase in _R_[2] from adding _TIk_ as an extra regressor is not economically significant. 

Interestingly, we found that the relation between ∆ _LPk[t]_[and] _[OFI][k]_[is][concave][in][some] samples, and similarly for ∆ _LPk[t]_[and] _[ TI][k]_[.][We estimated regressions (8a) and (8b) for transaction] price changes with additional quadratic terms _OFIk|OFIk|_ (respectively, _TIk|TIk|_ ) and found that they are significant in nearly half of the samples with t-statistics of -2.8 on average (-2.3 for _TIk|TIk|_ ). Sampling data at special times (trade times) may introduce biases to the right side of the regression. One possible explanation is that traders submit their orders when they expect their impact to be minimal, leading to a concave (sublinear) impact. Supporting this idea of sampling biases, we found that when mid-prices are sampled at trade times, the price impact of _OFIk_ is again concave in some samples. On another hand, when we regressed last trade prices sampled at 1-minute frequency on _OFIk_ , we observed the concave price impact once again. This suggests that using either trade times or trade prices may lead to non-linear price impact. However the quadratic term in our regressions is insignificant in about half of the samples and marginally significant in the the other half of the data. 

## **4.2 Does volume move the prices?** 

The relation between price changes and volume is empirically confirmed by many authors (see [27] for a review). Recently, traded volume became an important metric for order execution algorithms - these algorithms often attempt to match a certain percentage of the total traded volume to reduce the price impact. However, it remains unclear whether the traded volume truly determines the magnitude of price moves and whether it is a good metric for price impact. Casting doubt on this assertion, Jones et al. [26] showed that the relation between the daily volatility and the daily volume is essentially due to the number of trades and not the volume per se (also see [ **?** ] for the discussion). 

We extend this result in two ways. First, we show that even when prices are driven by order flow imbalance, an apparent (concave) dependence on traded volume may emerge as an artifact due to data aggregation. Second, we empirically confirm that the price-volume relation is an indirect one - it becomes statistically insignificant after accounting for the order flow imbalance. The volume traded during a time interval [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ] is: 

**==> picture [278 x 38] intentionally omitted <==**

where _wn_ = _bn_ + _sn_ is the size of any trade (either buy or sell) if it occurs at the _n_ -th quote or zero otherwise. Comparing this definition with the definition of _OFIk_ we note that both quantities are sums of random variables. As the aggregation window [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ] becomes progressively larger, the behavior of these sums (under certain assumptions) will be governed by the Law of Large Numbers and the Central Limit Theorem. We consider a time interval [0 _, T_ ) and denote by 

> 5The stocks tickers were BDX, CB, MHS, PHM and PKI. We computed price changes for _L_ = 2 _,_ 5 _,_ 10 trades to mitigate the possible issues with trade and quote alignment in the TAQ data and we correspondingly computed order flow imbalances and trade imbalances during the time intervals between 2, 5 or 10 consecutive trades. To ensure that there is an ample amount of data for each regression, we pooled data across days for each stock and each time interval. 

18 

_N_ ( _T_ ) the number of order book events during that time interval. We also denote by _OFI_ ( _T_ ) and _V OL_ ( _T_ ), respectively, the order flow imbalance and the traded volume during [0 _, T_ ). The following proposition shows a link between _OFI_ ( _T_ ) and _V OL_ ( _T_ ) as _T_ grows. 

**Proposition 1.** _Assume that_ 

_1. Order book events accumulate over time at some average rate_ Λ _:[N] T_[(] _[T]_[)] _→_ Λ _, as T →∞ 2. {ei}[∞] i_ =1 _[are][i.i.d.][random][variables][with][a][finite][variance][σ]_[2] _[,]_ 

_3. {wi}[∞] i_ =1 _[are][i.i.d.][random][variables][with][a][finite][mean][µπ][,][where][π][is][the][proportion][of] order book events that correspond to trades and µ is the mean trade size._ 

**==> picture [332 x 29] intentionally omitted <==**

_where ξ ∼ N_ (0 _,_ 1) _is a standard normal random variable and ⇒ denotes convergence in distribution._ 

**Proof:** First, we apply the law of large numbers to the traded volume. Assumption (1) ensures that _N_ ( _T_ ) _→∞_ as _T →∞_ : 

**==> picture [341 x 31] intentionally omitted <==**

Second, event contributions _ei_ have a finite variance _σ_[2] and, under our assumptions, we can apply the classical central limit theorem to the order flow imbalance: 

**==> picture [322 x 33] intentionally omitted <==**

where _ξ ∼ N_ (0 _,_ 1) is a standard normal random variable. Although the denominator _σ_ ~~�~~ _N_ ( _T_ ) is random, it goes to infinity by assumption (1) and Anscombe’s lemma ensures that we can use such a normalization in the central limit theorem [13, Lemma 2.5.8]. Since the square root function is continuous, the convergence in (10) takes place almost-surely and the limit in (10) is deterministic, we can combine (10) and (11) in the following way: 

**==> picture [341 x 54] intentionally omitted <==**

## ■ 

If the time interval [0 _, T_ ) includes a large enough number of order book events and trades, the above limit argument implies a noisy scaling relation between order flow imbalance and the square root of traded volume: 

**==> picture [297 x 24] intentionally omitted <==**

where _µ, π_ and _σ_ are constants and _ξ ∼ N_ (0 _,_ 1). Now, assume that it holds not just for the first interval, but for every time interval [ _tk−_ 1 _, tk_ ) of large enough length ∆ _t_ , regardless of its index _k_ . Then, (13) can be substituted into our model (2), to yield: 

**==> picture [284 x 14] intentionally omitted <==**

19 

where _θk_ = _βiξk_ ~~_√_~~ _σµπ_[is][a][slope][coefficient][and] _[ξ][k][∼][N]_[(0] _[,]_[ 1)][is][a][noise][term][due][to][scaling.] Due to the scaling approximation, the slope _θk_ in (14) is a random normal variable: _θk ∼ N_ (0 _, βi_[2] _µπσ_[2][).][For][every][time][interval][[] _[t][k][−]_[1] _[, t][k]_[)][the][ratio] _√σµπ_ ~~_√_~~ _OV OLFIk k_[is][a][different][draw][from][the] _N_ (0 _,_ 1) distribution, leading to a different _θk_ in each case. This additional randomness makes this model considerably less robust than (2) and we do not recommend to use it. 

Equation (14) shows that even if prices are driven by the order flow imbalance (i.e. even if _ϵk_ = 0 _∀k_ ), there will be a noisy square-root relation between the price changes and the traded volume. However, if the assumptions of Proposition 1 do not hold (e.g. _{ei}[∞] i_ =1[are][strongly] dependent or have infinite variance), the price-volume relation may have a different exponent. A variety of exponents 0 _< H <_ 1 have been observed in the relation between prices changes and trade sizes [8], suggesting the following model: 

**==> picture [280 x 13] intentionally omitted <==**

To estimate the exponent _H_ , we put _ϵk_ = 0 and _θk_ = _θ_[¯] _iξk_ in (15) and fit a logarithmic regression to every half-hour subsample, indexed by _i_ : 

**==> picture [326 x 16] intentionally omitted <==**

Based on Proposition 1, we expect the price-volume relation to be indirect (i.e. come through _OFIk_ ) and noisy. To empirically confirm this, we compare the following three regressions: 

**==> picture [307 x 15] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [306 x 17] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [341 x 17] intentionally omitted <==**

These regressions are estimated for every half-hour subsample with the exponents _H_[ˆ] _i_ preestimated by (16). The averages of _H_[ˆ] _i_ and their standard deviation for each stock are presented on the left panel in Table 5. The exponent varies considerably across stocks and time, but is generally below 1/2 in our data. The average results of regressions (17a-17c) for each stock are presentedprice movesonbetterthe middlethan _V OL_ and right _Hk_ ˆ _i_[.][Although] panels. We[both] observe[variables] that[appear] _|OFIk_[to] _|_ explains[be][statistically] the magnitude[significant] of when taken individually, only _|OFIk|_ remains significant in the multiple regression. Thus, the dependence between the magnitude of price moves and the traded volume is mostly due to correlation between _V OLk_ and _|OFIk|_ . Interestingly, the number of trades variable (suggested in [26]) is also statistically significant on a stand-alone basis, but becomes insignificant when added to (17c) as a third variable. 

20 

## **5 Conclusion** 

We have introduced _order flow imbalance_ , a variable that cumulates the sizes of order book events, treating the contributions of market, limit and cancel orders equally, and provided empirical and theoretical evidence for a linear relation between high-frequency price changes and order flow imbalance for individual stocks. We have shown that this linear model is robust across stocks and the impact coefficient is inversely proportional to market depth. These relations suggest that prices respond to changes in the supply and demand for shares at the best quotes, and that the impact coefficient fluctuates with the amount of liquidity provision, or depth, in the market. Moreover, we have demonstrated that order flow imbalance is a stronger driver of high-frequency price changes than standard measures of trade imbalance. Trades seem to carry little to no information about price changes after the simultaneous order flow imbalance is taken into account. If trades do not help to explain price changes after controlling for the order flow imbalance, it is highly possible that the relation between price changes and traded volume simply capture the noisy scaling relation between these variables. 

Overall, these findings seem to give an intuitive picture of the price impact of order book events, which is somewhat simpler than the one conveyed by previous studies. 

21 

Table 5. Comparison of traded volume and order flow imbalance. 

|Ticker|Avg<br>Stdev<br>ˆ_H_<br>ˆ_H_|Order fow imbalance<br>|Traded volume<br>|Both covariates<br><br>|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||_R_2<br>_t_(ˆ_βO_)<br>_βO _= 0<br>_F_|_R_2<br>_t_(ˆ_βV_)<br>_βV _= 0<br>_F_|_R_2<br>_t_(ˆ_φO_)<br>_t_(ˆ_φV_)<br>_φO _= 0<br>_φV _= 0<br>_F_|
|AMD<br>APOL<br>AXP<br>AZO<br>BAC<br>BDX<br>BK<br>BSX<br>BTU<br>CAT<br>CB<br>CCL<br>CINF<br>CME<br>COH<br>COP<br>CVH<br>DNR<br>DVN<br>EFX<br>ETN<br>FISV<br>HAS<br>HCP<br>HOT<br>KSS<br>LLL<br>LMT<br>M<br>MAR<br>MFE<br>MHP<br>MHS<br>MRK<br>MRO<br>MWV<br>NEM<br>OMC<br>PCS<br>PHM<br>PKI<br>R<br>RAI<br>SLB<br>TE<br>TWC<br>WHR<br>WIN<br>WPI<br>XTO|0.06<br>0.08<br>0.24<br>0.08<br>0.16<br>0.08<br>0.43<br>0.22<br>0.09<br>0.08<br>0.26<br>0.10<br>0.11<br>0.07<br>-0.17<br>2.41<br>0.24<br>0.07<br>0.22<br>0.07<br>0.19<br>0.09<br>0.14<br>0.07<br>0.13<br>0.12<br>0.49<br>0.24<br>0.19<br>0.07<br>0.16<br>0.07<br>0.18<br>0.10<br>0.08<br>0.07<br>0.26<br>0.07<br>0.20<br>0.11<br>0.26<br>0.10<br>0.19<br>0.11<br>0.20<br>0.09<br>0.14<br>0.07<br>0.23<br>0.08<br>0.24<br>0.08<br>0.33<br>0.12<br>0.28<br>0.09<br>0.11<br>0.07<br>0.15<br>0.07<br>0.16<br>0.09<br>0.20<br>0.10<br>0.23<br>0.08<br>0.10<br>0.07<br>0.09<br>0.06<br>0.18<br>0.10<br>0.20<br>0.07<br>0.15<br>0.09<br>0.11<br>0.18<br>0.07<br>0.08<br>0.11<br>0.11<br>0.27<br>0.11<br>0.25<br>0.10<br>0.24<br>0.07<br>0.09<br>1.69<br>0.25<br>0.10<br>0.34<br>0.11<br>0.06<br>0.26<br>0.22<br>0.10<br>0.08<br>0.06|63%<br>10.3<br>99%<br>356<br>53%<br>8.3<br>90%<br>258<br>55%<br>10.5<br>100%<br>249<br>39%<br>5.5<br>96%<br>131<br>73%<br>16.3<br>100%<br>560<br>55%<br>8.4<br>99%<br>261<br>68%<br>13.1<br>100%<br>437<br>68%<br>8.4<br>100%<br>486<br>58%<br>10.5<br>99%<br>283<br>56%<br>10.4<br>98%<br>250<br>56%<br>10.1<br>99%<br>261<br>60%<br>11.3<br>100%<br>309<br>67%<br>10.6<br>99%<br>505<br>28%<br>4.1<br>94%<br>78<br>60%<br>10.4<br>99%<br>299<br>56%<br>9.8<br>100%<br>277<br>62%<br>10.2<br>100%<br>352<br>64%<br>12.0<br>99%<br>376<br>52%<br>8.6<br>93%<br>236<br>52%<br>8.1<br>99%<br>241<br>55%<br>8.2<br>97%<br>252<br>57%<br>9.1<br>100%<br>284<br>61%<br>10.1<br>100%<br>328<br>57%<br>11.1<br>100%<br>268<br>57%<br>9.7<br>98%<br>263<br>60%<br>10.8<br>97%<br>318<br>58%<br>9.4<br>94%<br>323<br>61%<br>10.7<br>99%<br>327<br>69%<br>13.9<br>100%<br>463<br>61%<br>12.3<br>100%<br>324<br>60%<br>10.9<br>99%<br>318<br>62%<br>10.2<br>99%<br>377<br>56%<br>9.2<br>99%<br>258<br>62%<br>11.0<br>100%<br>330<br>61%<br>11.8<br>100%<br>333<br>62%<br>10.3<br>100%<br>330<br>56%<br>9.9<br>99%<br>253<br>57%<br>10.1<br>99%<br>286<br>62%<br>7.1<br>96%<br>411<br>64%<br>10.2<br>100%<br>384<br>55%<br>7.8<br>99%<br>266<br>56%<br>8.6<br>98%<br>259<br>61%<br>9.2<br>99%<br>334<br>62%<br>12.0<br>99%<br>330<br>60%<br>8.0<br>98%<br>371<br>55%<br>9.7<br>99%<br>253<br>56%<br>8.2<br>97%<br>272<br>48%<br>3.9<br>79%<br>340<br>61%<br>9.6<br>98%<br>361<br>53%<br>10.9<br>100%<br>238|14%<br>4.5<br>83%<br>34<br>25%<br>6.8<br>99%<br>63<br>20%<br>6.6<br>100%<br>48<br>32%<br>5.3<br>100%<br>93<br>24%<br>5.6<br>83%<br>61<br>27%<br>6.3<br>100%<br>71<br>19%<br>6.6<br>97%<br>46<br>14%<br>3.3<br>95%<br>33<br>23%<br>6.8<br>99%<br>57<br>19%<br>6.0<br>98%<br>44<br>23%<br>6.4<br>99%<br>58<br>19%<br>6.6<br>99%<br>45<br>30%<br>6.1<br>98%<br>85<br>30%<br>4.8<br>99%<br>83<br>22%<br>6.5<br>99%<br>52<br>20%<br>6.0<br>96%<br>49<br>27%<br>5.9<br>99%<br>72<br>17%<br>6.3<br>95%<br>38<br>24%<br>6.7<br>100%<br>59<br>26%<br>5.4<br>99%<br>69<br>27%<br>6.4<br>99%<br>70<br>25%<br>5.9<br>100%<br>65<br>26%<br>6.2<br>100%<br>67<br>21%<br>7.0<br>99%<br>50<br>24%<br>6.9<br>100%<br>60<br>25%<br>6.6<br>99%<br>61<br>34%<br>6.9<br>100%<br>101<br>31%<br>7.3<br>100%<br>85<br>20%<br>6.3<br>99%<br>46<br>21%<br>6.9<br>99%<br>50<br>24%<br>7.1<br>98%<br>62<br>25%<br>5.9<br>99%<br>62<br>24%<br>6.6<br>100%<br>58<br>17%<br>5.4<br>99%<br>40<br>16%<br>6.3<br>95%<br>36<br>28%<br>6.7<br>100%<br>75<br>20%<br>6.1<br>99%<br>47<br>20%<br>6.4<br>98%<br>48<br>18%<br>3.7<br>97%<br>54<br>15%<br>5.5<br>90%<br>34<br>20%<br>4.8<br>97%<br>47<br>28%<br>6.0<br>100%<br>74<br>28%<br>5.7<br>100%<br>73<br>19%<br>5.5<br>98%<br>46<br>18%<br>4.4<br>85%<br>48<br>27%<br>6.6<br>100%<br>73<br>29%<br>6.3<br>100%<br>78<br>10%<br>2.8<br>50%<br>34<br>28%<br>5.8<br>100%<br>75<br>15%<br>6.5<br>100%<br>32|63%<br>9.4<br>1.1<br>99%<br>35%<br>182<br>57%<br>6.9<br>2.9<br>89%<br>84%<br>144<br>57%<br>9.0<br>2.8<br>100%<br>81%<br>133<br>50%<br>4.3<br>3.6<br>94%<br>96%<br>98<br>74%<br>13.9<br>1.2<br>96%<br>35%<br>285<br>58%<br>6.7<br>2.9<br>98%<br>84%<br>147<br>68%<br>11.5<br>2.0<br>99%<br>58%<br>225<br>69%<br>8.0<br>0.1<br>97%<br>12%<br>246<br>60%<br>8.9<br>2.4<br>99%<br>78%<br>151<br>57%<br>8.9<br>2.1<br>98%<br>63%<br>131<br>58%<br>8.2<br>2.6<br>99%<br>74%<br>141<br>62%<br>9.9<br>2.4<br>99%<br>74%<br>162<br>69%<br>8.7<br>2.0<br>99%<br>55%<br>268<br>42%<br>3.2<br>3.6<br>86%<br>94%<br>71<br>61%<br>8.9<br>2.2<br>98%<br>69%<br>157<br>58%<br>8.4<br>2.4<br>100%<br>70%<br>145<br>64%<br>8.2<br>2.2<br>100%<br>70%<br>189<br>65%<br>10.7<br>1.8<br>99%<br>55%<br>193<br>55%<br>7.1<br>2.9<br>91%<br>81%<br>131<br>56%<br>6.4<br>2.7<br>97%<br>75%<br>137<br>58%<br>6.8<br>2.9<br>96%<br>83%<br>142<br>59%<br>7.3<br>2.2<br>99%<br>66%<br>153<br>63%<br>8.2<br>2.3<br>100%<br>73%<br>175<br>59%<br>9.3<br>2.7<br>100%<br>79%<br>143<br>60%<br>8.2<br>3.0<br>98%<br>85%<br>145<br>62%<br>9.0<br>2.4<br>97%<br>74%<br>169<br>63%<br>7.1<br>3.0<br>91%<br>86%<br>188<br>64%<br>8.4<br>2.9<br>99%<br>84%<br>182<br>69%<br>12.2<br>2.0<br>100%<br>60%<br>238<br>62%<br>10.4<br>2.4<br>100%<br>71%<br>170<br>62%<br>8.8<br>2.5<br>99%<br>71%<br>170<br>64%<br>8.5<br>1.9<br>99%<br>55%<br>199<br>58%<br>7.7<br>2.6<br>98%<br>77%<br>139<br>63%<br>9.8<br>1.8<br>100%<br>55%<br>170<br>63%<br>10.6<br>2.0<br>100%<br>54%<br>172<br>64%<br>8.2<br>2.4<br>100%<br>74%<br>180<br>58%<br>8.6<br>2.5<br>99%<br>75%<br>135<br>59%<br>8.6<br>2.4<br>98%<br>73%<br>151<br>63%<br>6.5<br>0.7<br>93%<br>20%<br>214<br>65%<br>9.4<br>1.2<br>99%<br>40%<br>195<br>57%<br>6.7<br>1.8<br>98%<br>53%<br>141<br>59%<br>6.9<br>2.9<br>97%<br>85%<br>147<br>63%<br>7.6<br>2.4<br>99%<br>71%<br>182<br>63%<br>10.6<br>1.7<br>99%<br>51%<br>171<br>61%<br>7.2<br>1.3<br>98%<br>39%<br>196<br>58%<br>7.6<br>3.0<br>99%<br>81%<br>142<br>59%<br>6.6<br>2.9<br>95%<br>86%<br>156<br>49%<br>3.7<br>0.6<br>79%<br>29%<br>179<br>64%<br>7.7<br>2.2<br>98%<br>71%<br>196<br>55%<br>9.6<br>2.7<br>100%<br>78%<br>125|
|Grand mean|0.18<br>0.18|58%<br>9.8<br>98%<br>313|23%<br>6.0<br>97%<br>58|61%<br>8.3<br>2.3<br>97%<br>67%<br>168|



Table 5 presents the average results of regressions: 

_|_ ∆ _Pk|_ = _α_ ˆ _O,i_ + _β_[ˆ] _O,i|OFIk|_ + ˆ _ϵO,k_ , 

ˆ _|_ ∆ _Pk|_ = _α_ ˆ _V,i_ + _β_[ˆ] _V,iV OLHk i_ + ˆ _ϵV,k_ , ˆ _|_ ∆ _Pk|_ = _α_ ˆ _W,i_ + _φ_[ˆ] _O,i|OFIk|_ + _φ_[ˆ] _V,iV OLHk i_ + ˆ _ϵW,k_ , 

where ∆ _Pk_ are the 10-second mid-price changes, _OFIk_ are the contemporaneous order flow imbalances and _V OLk_ are the contemporaneous trade volumes. The exponents _H_[ˆ] _i_ were estimated in each subsample beforehand using a logarithmic regression: log _|_ ∆ _Pk|_ = log _θ_[ˆ¯] _i_ + _H_[ˆ] _i_ log _V OLk_ + log _ξ_[ˆ] _k_ . These regressions were estimated using 273 half-hour subsamples (indexed by _i_ ) for each stock and their outputs were averaged across subsamples. Each subsample typically contains about 180 observations (indexed by _k_ ). The t-statistics were computed using White’s standard errors. For each of three regressions, Table 5 reports the average _R_[2] , the average t-statistic of the coefficient(s), the percentage of samples where the coefficient(s) passed the z-sest at the 5% significance level and the F-statistic of the regression. 

22 

## **References** 

- [1] H. Ahn, K. Bae, and K. Chan, _Limit orders, depth, and volatility: evidence from the stock exchange of Hong Kong_ , Journal of Finance, 56 (2001), pp. 767–788. 

- [2] R. Almgren and N. Chriss, _Optimal execution of portfolio transactions_ , Journal of Risk, 3 (2000), pp. 5–39. 

- [3] R. Almgren, C. Thum, E. Hauptmann, and H. Li, _Direct estimation of equity market impact_ , Journal of Risk, 18 (2005), p. 57. 

- [4] T. Andersen and T. Bollerslev, _Deutsche mark - dollar volatility: intraday activity patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies_ , Journal of Finance, 53 (1998), p. 219. 

- [5] M. Avellaneda, S. Stoikov, and J. Reed, _Forecasting prices from level-I quotes in the presence of hidden liquidity_ . Working paper, 2010. 

- [6] D. Bertsimas and A. Lo, _Optimal control of execution costs_ , Journal of Financial Markets, 1 (1998), pp. 1–50. 

- [7] J.-P. Bouchaud, _Encyclopedia of Quantitative Finance_ , Wiley, 2010, ch. Price Impact. 

- [8] J.-P. Bouchaud, D. Farmer, and F. Lillo, _Handbook of financial markets: dynamics and evolution_ , Elsevier: Academic Press, 2009, ch. How markets slowly digest changes in supply and demand. 

- [9] J.-P. Bouchaud, Y. Gefen, M. Potters, and M. Wyart, _Fluctuations and response in financial markets: the subtle nature of ’random’ price changes_ , Quantitative Finance, 4 (2004), p. 176. 

- [10] T. Chordia, R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, _Liquidity and market efficiency_ , Journal of Financial Economics, 87 (2008), p. 249. 

- [11] P. K. Clark, _A subordinated stochastic process model with finite variance for speculative price_ , Econometrica, 41 (1973), pp. 135–155. 

- [12] Z. Eisler, J.-P. Bouchaud, and J. Kockelkoren, _The price impact of order book events: market orders, limit orders and cancellations_ , Quantitative Finance Papers 0904.0900, arXiv.org, Apr. 2009. 

- [13] P. Embrechts, C. Kluppelberg, and T. Mikosch, _Modelling extremal events for insurance and finance_ , Springer, 1997. 

- [14] R. Engle, R. Ferstenberg, and J. Russel, _Measuring and modeling execution cost and risk_ . NYU Working Paper No. FIN-06-044, 2006. 

- [15] R. Engle and A. Lunde, _Trades and quotes: a bivariate point process_ , Journal of Financial Econometrics, 1 (2003), pp. 159–188. 

- [16] M. Evans and R. Lyons, _Order flow and exchange rate dynamics_ , Journal of Political Economy, 110 (2002), p. 170. 

- [17] J. D. Farmer, L. Gillemot, F. Lillo, S. Mike, and A. Sen, _What really causes large price changes?_ , Quantitative Finance, 4 (2004), pp. 383–397. 

23 

- [18] X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, and H. Stanley, _A theory of power-law distributions in financial market fluctuations_ , Nature, 423 (2003), p. 267. 

- [19] J. Gatheral, _No-dynamic-arbitrage and market impact_ , Quantitative Finance, 10 (2010), p. 749. 

- [20] J. Hasbrouck, _Measuring the information content of stock trades_ , Journal of Finance, 46 (1991), pp. 179–207. 

- [21] ~~,~~ _The summary informativeness of stock trades: An econometric analysis_ , Review of Financial Studies, 4 (1991), p. 571. 

- [22] J. Hasbrouck and D. Seppi, _Common factors in prices, order flows and liquidity_ , Journal of Finance and Economics, 59 (2001), p. 383. 

- [23] N. Hautsch and R. Huang, _The market impact of a limit order_ . SFB 649 Discussion Papers, 2009. 

- [24] C. Hopman, _Do supply and demand drive stock prices?_ , Quantitative Finance, 7 (2007), pp. 37–53. 

- [25] G. Huberman and W. Stanzl, _Price manipulation and quasi-arbitrage_ , Econometrica, 72 (2004), pp. 1247–1275. 

- [26] C. Jones, G. Kaul, and M. Lipson, _Transactions, volume, and volatility_ , Review of Financial Studies, 7 (1994), pp. 631–651. 

- [27] J. Karpoff, _The relation between price changes and trading volume: A survey_ , Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 22 (1987), p. 109. 

- [28] D. Keim and A. Madhavan, _The upstairs market for large-block transactions: Analysis and measurement of price effects_ , Review of Economic Studies, 9 (1996), p. 1. 

- [29] A. Kempf and O. Korn, _Market depth and order size_ , Journal of Financial Markets, 2 (1999), p. 29. 

- [30] P. Knez and M. Ready, _Estimating the profits from trading strategies_ , Review of Financial Studies, 9 (1996), p. 1121. 

- [31] C. Lee, B. Mucklow, and M. Ready, _Spreads, depths, and the impact of earnings information: an intraday analysis_ , Review of Financial Studies, 6 (1993), pp. 345–374. 

- [32] C. Lee and M. Ready, _Inferring trade direction from intraday data_ , Journal of Finance, 46 (1991), pp. 733–746. 

- [33] A. Madhavan, M. Richardson, and M. Roomans, _Why do security prices change? a transaction-level analysis of nyse stocks_ , Review of Financial Studies, 10 (1997), p. 1035. 

- [34] T. McInish and R. Wood, _An analysis of intraday patterns in bid/ask spreads for nyse stocks_ , Journal of Finance, 47 (1992), pp. 753–764. 

- [35] A. Obizhaeva and J. Wang, _Optimal trading strategy and supply/demand dynamics_ . NBER Working Papers, No 11444, 2005. 

- [36] E. Odders-White, _On the occurrence and consequences of inaccurate trade classification_ , Journal of Financial Markets, 3 (2000), pp. 259–286. 

24 

- [37] M. O’Hara, _Market Microstructure Theory_ , Wiley, 1998. 

- [38] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, and H. Stanley, _Quantifying stock-price response to demand fluctuations_ , Physical Review E, 66 (2002), p. 027104. 

- [39] M. Potters and J. Bouchaud, _More statistical properties of order books and price impact_ , Physica A, 324 (2003), p. 133 140. 

- [40] G. Richardson, S. E. Sefcik, and R. Thompson, _A test of dividend irrelevance using vol? ume reaction to a change in dividend polic_ , Journal of Financial Economics, 17 (1986), pp. 313–333. 

- [41] C. Stephens, H. Waelbroeck, and A. Mendoza, _Relating market impact to aggregate order flow: the role of supply and demand in explaining concavity and order flow dynamics_ . Working Paper Series, 11 2009. 

- [42] E. Theissen, _A test of the accuracy of the lee/ready trade classification algorithm_ , Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 11 (2001), pp. 147–165. 

- [43] N. Torre and M. Ferrari, _The Market Impact Model_ , BARRA, 1997. 

- [44] P. Weber and B. Rosenow, _Order book approach to price impact_ , Quantitative Finance, 5 (2005), pp. 357–364. 

- [45] P. Weber and B. Rosenow, _Large stock price changes: volume or liquidity?_ , Quantitative Finance, 6 (2006), p. 7. 

- [46] I. Zovko and J. D. Farmer, _The power of patience: A behavioral regularity in limit order placement_ , Quantitative Finance, 2 (2002), pp. 387–392. 

25 

## **A Appendix: TAQ data processing** 

Quotes data were filtered as follows: 

1. Timestamp _∈_ [9:30 am, 4:00 pm]. 

2. Bid, ask, bid size, ask size are positive. 

3. Quote mode _̸∈{_ 4 _,_ 7 _,_ 9 _,_ 11 _,_ 13 _,_ 14 _,_ 15 _,_ 19 _,_ 20 _,_ 27 _,_ 28 _}_ 

Trades data were as follows: 

1. Timestamp _∈_ [9:30 am, 4:00 pm]. 

2. Price and size are positive. 

3. Correction indicator _≤_ 2. 

4. Condition _̸∈{_ ” _O_ ” _,_ ” _Z_ ” _,_ ” _B_ ” _,_ ” _T_ ” _,_ ” _L_ ” _,_ ” _G_ ” _,_ ” _W_ ” _,_ ” _J_ ” _,_ ” _K_ ” _}_ 

From the filtered quotes data we construct the National Best Bid and Offer (NBBO) quotes. This is done by scanning through the filtered quotes data, while maintaining a matrix with the best quotes for every exchange. When a new entry is read, we check the exchange flag of that entry and update the corresponding row in the exchange matrix. Using this matrix, the NBBO prices are computed at each entry as the highest bid and the lowest ask across all exchanges. The NBBO sizes are simply the sums of all sizes at the NBBO bid and ask across all exchanges. 

After the NBBO quotes are computed, we applied a simple quote test to the NBBO quotes and the filtered trades data. This test matches trades with NBBO quotes and computes the direction of matched trades. A trade is matched with a quote, if: 

1. Trade is not inside the spread, i.e. 

   - (a) Trade price _≥_ NBBO ask: in this case the trade is considered to be a buy trade. 

   - (b) Trade price _≤_ NBBO bid: in this case the trade is considered to be a sell trade. 

2. Trade date = quote date. 

3. Trade timestamp _∈_ [quote timestamp, quote timestamp + 1 second]. 

4. If the above conditions allow to match a trade with several quotes, it is matched with the earliest quote. 

There are other routines to estimate trade direction, including the tick test and the LeeReady rule [32]. Although the latter is used quite frequently, there seems to be no compelling evidence of superiority of either of these heuristics [36, 42]. To test the robustness of our findings to the choice of a trade direction test, we compared our results on a subsample of data, applying alternatively the tick test or the quote test and it led to virtually the same results. 

Finally, we removed observations with extremely high bid-ask spreads. To apply this filter coherently across stocks, we computed for each stock the 95-th percentile of its bid-ask spread distribution and removed the 5% of that stock’s quotes with the spreads above that percentile. 

26 

